On May 10, India and Pakistan declared a ceasefire following four days of escalating military hostilities. This came in the aftermath of the April 22 terrorist attack in Pahalgam, in which 26 people were killed, and India’s reprisal military attacks inside Pakistan after that, called Operation Sindoor.Srinath Raghavan, a military historian and author of several books, notably War and Peace in Modern India, spoke to Frontline about how terrorism could not be solved through “deterrence by punishment” alone. He added that “deterrence by denial” was just as important in the form of hardening India’s counter-terrorism infrastructure and making moves to deny Pakistan the ability to weaponise the Kashmir problem. Edited excerpts:Will the ceasefire hold?Well, it looks like the ceasefire will hold because both India and Pakistan, at a political level, have said that their immediate objectives for this particular crisis have been achieved. So, there is definitely, at the political level, a desire not to see a resumption of hostilities at full scale. At the same time, we have been seeing reports about violations of the ceasefire by Pakistan—firing, drone activity, etc. Again, I’m in no position to verify how accurate these reports are.But I will say this much. Looking at the ends of various conflicts that we have fought in the past, ceasefires always take a little bit of time to stabilise. People tend to be trigger-happy and tend to be a little jittery. There is always some very local jostling for advantage even as every conflict comes to an end. And this is practically true of all the wars and crises that we fought. Even in Kargil, for several days after the ceasefire was happening, there used to be sporadic movement, exchange of fire, constant conversations between the Directors General of Military Operations on either side that were required to make sure that it was stabilised. So, I wouldn’t overread what is happening now. It seems to me to be well within the pattern. And the most important thing is that, at the political level, it seems like we do have a ceasefire.The signing of the ceasefire itself has led to a lot of anger in India, especially in the BJP’s core constituencies and even in some sections of the Indian strategic community including the Indian military, that we have in effect “snatched defeat from the jaws of victory”, as one commentator has put it. Did India have a choice of actually continuing the hostilities until a victory had been extracted from it?Well, victory in any military context, whether it is a war or a crisis, is only to be measured based on the political objectives for which that particular conflict is being waged. If our political objective was a total defeat and destruction of Pakistan, then yes, perhaps we should have continued this conflict till that particular end was either attained or it became absolutely clear that it was unattainable in this case. However, it does seem—and I’m going by the official briefings which have been given by the military spokesperson—the Director General of Military Operations in his press conference the other day also explained [that] the Prime Minister has given a speech. None of it suggests that our objectives were that much more than instilling a degree of fear and caution in Pakistan, that support for acts of terrorism against India will go unpunished, that you cannot have impunity, and that we will impose costs on you in order to get you to desist from these kinds of activities. So that seems to have been a much more limited objective.In fact, in today’s newspapers, I saw articles by former senior military officials, which I suppose reflects the thinking within the military, which is to say that our objective was not to even expect that Pakistan would entirely dismantle its terrorist infrastructure. We wanted to punish; we wanted to cause damage to terrorist infrastructure and send out a signal that in the future, this punishment will be forthcoming. And that is all towards the end of establishing deterrence or preventing the recurrence of such attacks, which I think is a much more limited, circumscribed objective than this idea that we have to once and for all solve the problem of our relations with Pakistan, whatever that might mean.This is the third punitive strike against Pakistan in nine years. The first was in 2016, the surgical strike after the terrorist attack on the Uri brigade headquarters. The next one was in 2019 after the suicide bombing in Pulwama, which killed 40 CRPF [Central Reserve Police Force] personnel. And now this one after the terrorist attack at Baisaran Valley in Pahalgam. So, every attack has been about deterrence, about punishing Pakistan, about getting it to cease and desist from enabling terrorists or even using them directly as proxies in India. So, what do you think Operation Sindoor really achieved?Well, there are two questions here. The first question is whether military strikes of the kind that we’ve carried out since 2016 are, by themselves, going to solve the problem of terrorism for us. And for a variety of reasons, I believe that is not the case. This can be one part of a larger package of responses that we have, but it is unlikely that it can solve.… I’d say upfront: unless and until we harden our counterterrorism infrastructure within Jammu and Kashmir itself, commensurate to the new kind of situation that exists there, we are likely to see that some of these sporadic attacks will continue because it is relatively easier and low cost for terrorist organisations and their sponsors to carry out these kinds of attacks.As far as Operation Sindoor [is concerned], I think we have demonstrated that India has both the capacity to attack Pakistan and impose costs, and that we have the will to do so. So the capability has been demonstrated for carrying out standoff strikes against a range of targets, not just terrorist infrastructure but also headquarters of organisations that were supporting terror, wider military installations across the Punjab and other parts of Pakistan. So I think both geographically and in terms of weapon systems we’ve deployed—and I’m here just going by reports of what we see—weapon systems like BrahMos, which apparently struck their target, particularly the Nur Khan Air Force Base in Pakistan, which suggests that some of the technologies that we have developed with the Russians jointly, which is indigenous, a cruise missile system, has shown its capability in a conflict situation. So there have been a series of such things that we have achieved.Now the question is whether we expect that these attacks will, in a sense, restore deterrence. But that puts too much of a burden on just these kinds of actions. Deterrence always operates at least two different levels. There is what we call deterrence by punishment. So you punish someone for an act, thereby sending a message that, please do not do this in the future, otherwise you will get the same retaliation. A lot of domestic crime is about deterrence by punishment, because that’s what the laws are there for, that’s what the police are there to implement the laws.But there is also another form of deterrence that we call deterrence by denial, which is to say that you harden your defensive capabilities to the point where it becomes much more difficult for the other side even to carry out attacks. And that is at least as important as deterrence by punishment. To give you the analogy, if you want to protect your house from being burgled, you won’t just depend on the laws of the land to deter potential burglars. You also want to put up fences, you want to put up electrification, you may want to have security guards. So, deterrence for denial is at least in fact much more important when it comes to things like terrorism. Precisely because terrorism is a very low-cost activity for the other side to carry out, and there are a number of groups, a lot of floating capability to carry out these kinds of things. So if you are really serious about deterring terrorism, we need a combination of denial and punishment. Because of the background of the present crisis, we are very much focused purely on the punitive aspects of what our response should be. I think the denial-based aspects need at least as much consideration.